---
layout: post
title: "Science Olypiad Projects"
date: 2018-02-08 -0500
permalink: /:categories/:title
categories:
---

Throughout high school, I was a member of the Science Olympiad team.
I mostly worked on building events.  Here is a list of some more successful building events:

* **Mechanical clock**
    * I built an entirely mechanical clock that had to accurately keep time for up to five minutes
    This clock was mostly built out of wood, and it used a [gravity escapement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Escapement#Gravity_escapement).
    Despite its questionable structural integrity, it kept time impressively well, to within a quarter second in five minutes.

* **Electric Vehicle**
    * The goal of electric vehicle was to aim a vehicle so that it stopped as close to a target as possible as fast as possible.
    Guidance took the form of aiming the vehicle extremely carefully and using dead reckoning.
    Fortunately for me, microprocessors were allowed.
    I found an old brushless motor and motor controller from building my [quadcopter](/projects/quadcopter), and I made a belt drive out of a large O-ring.
    Instead of using a rotary encoder like a normal human being, I painted black and white stripes on a wooden disk and used an Arduino and a photodiode to count distance.
    The Arduino also controlled the motor and used position data to provide an optimal acceleration and deceleration curve.
    To stop the car, a small servo pushed a small piece of aluminum stock into the belt drive, generating friction.
    Steering was another problem.  We could adjust the steering by making slight adjustments to the frame with threaded rod.
    However, it was impossible to get the steering perfect, so we calculated known steering errors for different distances and compensated accordingly.
    At the state competition, we got the car about 5 centimeters away from the target from a distance of 10 meters.

* **Mission Possible**
    * I include this project only out of grudging respect for its insanity.
    The goal of Mission Possible was to build a device that made as many energy transfers as possible.
    In fact, these energy transfers had to be between different kinds of energy--specifically mechanical, electrical, thermal, chemical, and optical energy.
    The inevitable result was a demented Rube Goldberg machine that changed every time the official Science Olympiad rules changed--which was quite often.
    I was roped into doing this event for two years, and both years, something inevitably broke or got disqualified.
    I only include this project to show that it was the bane of my existence for two years.

Unfortunately, I don't really have pictures of these projects.
Many of them were disassembled and the rest are sadly decaying on a shelf at my high school.
